Elixir testing doc (#1682)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/instrumentation/erlang/testing.md

---
title: "Testing"
draft: true
---

When relying on OpenTelemetry for alerts, pages, or SLIs/SLOs, it can be important to test that certain spans are created and attributes correctly set.

## Setup
Only the `opentelemetry` and `opentelemetry_api` libraries are required for testing in Elixir/Erlang:

{{< tabs Erlang Elixir >}}

{{< tab >}}
{deps, [{opentelemetry_api, "~> 1.0"},
        {opentelemetry, "~> 1.0"}]}.
{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab >}}
def deps do
  [
    {:opentelemetry_api, "~> 1.0"},
    {:opentelemetry, "~> 1.0"}
  ]
end
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabs >}}

> The test configuration should set the `exporter` to `:undefined` and the `:otel_batch_processor`'s delay to a minimum.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The test configuration should set the `exporter` to `:none` and the span processor to `:otel_simple_processor`.
```

{{< tabs Erlang Elixir >}}

{{< tab >}}

> TODO

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{opentelemetry,
  [{traces_exporter, none},
   {processors,
     [{otel_simple_processor, #{}}]}]}
```

{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab >}}
# config/test.exs
import Config

config :opentelemetry,

>     traces_exporter: :undefined

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    traces_exporter: :none
```

Either works but `none` keeps in line with what is used in general Otel docs.

config :opentelemetry, :processors, [

>   {:otel_batch_processor, %{scheduled_delay_ms: 1}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  {:otel_simple_processor, %{}}
```

The simple processor will export the span immediately and since it'll just be sending to a PID it doesn't matter that it also blocks for each span when it ends.

---
title: "Testing"

> draft: true

Reviewer 2: remove the draft and put a page weight here so that you have a defined position in the navigation

{{< tab >}}
{opentelemetry,
  [{traces_exporter, none},
   {processors,
     [{otel_simple_processor, #{}}]}]}
{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab >}}
# config/test.exs
import Config

config :opentelemetry,
    traces_exporter: :none

config :opentelemetry, :processors, [
  {:otel_simple_processor, %{}}
]
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabs >}}

A modified version of the `hello` function from the Getting Started guide will serve as our test case:

{{< tabs Erlang Elixir >}}

{{< tab >}}
%% apps/otel_getting_started/src/otel_getting_started.erl
-module(otel_getting_started).

-export([hello/0]).

-include_lib("opentelemetry_api/include/otel_tracer.hrl").

hello() ->
    %% start an active span and run a local function
    ?with_span(<<"operation">>, #{}, fun nice_operation/1).

nice_operation(_SpanCtx) ->
    ?set_attributes([{a_key, <<"a value">>}]),
    world
{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab >}}
# lib/otel_getting_started.ex
defmodule OtelGettingStarted do
  require OpenTelemetry.Tracer, as: Tracer

  def hello do
    Tracer.with_span "operation" do
      Tracer.set_attributes([{:a_key, "a value"}])
      :world
    end
  end
end
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabs >}}

## Testing

{{< tabs Erlang Elixir >}}

{{< tab >}}

> TODO

Author: Anyone interested in contributing here?

I don't have the relevant Erlang experience.

Reviewer: I still haven't gotten to this but still plan to.

---
title: "Testing"
weight: 40
---

> When relying on OpenTelemetry for alerts, pages, or SLIs/SLOs, it can be important to test that certain spans are created and attributes correctly set.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When relying on OpenTelemetry for your Observability needs, it can be important to test that certain spans are created and attributes correctly set. For example, can you be sure that you attaching the right metadata to data that ultimately powers an SLO? This document covers an approach to that kind of validation.
```

Author: Ah this is great.

## Setup
Only the `opentelemetry` and `opentelemetry_api` libraries are required for testing in Elixir/Erlang:

{{< tabs Erlang Elixir >}}

{{< tab >}}
{deps, [{opentelemetry_api, "~> 1.0"},
        {opentelemetry, "~> 1.0"}]}.
{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab >}}
def deps do
  [
    {:opentelemetry_api, "~> 1.0"},
    {:opentelemetry, "~> 1.0"}
  ]
end
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabs >}}

> The test configuration should set the `exporter` to `:none` and the span processor to `:otel_simple_processor`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Set your `exporter` to `:none` and the span processor to `:otel_simple_processor`. This ensure that your tests don't actually export data to a destination, and that spans can be analyzed after they are processed.
```

{{< tabs Erlang Elixir >}}

{{< tab >}}
%% config/sys.config.src
{opentelemetry,
  [{traces_exporter, none},
   {processors,
     [{otel_simple_processor, #{}}]}]}
{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab >}}
# config/test.exs
import Config

config :opentelemetry,
    traces_exporter: :none

config :opentelemetry, :processors, [
  {:otel_simple_processor, %{}}
]
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabs >}}

> A modified version of the `hello` function from the Getting Started guide will serve as our test case:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A modified version of the `hello` function from the Getting Started guide serves as a test case:
```

Link to the page as well here in "Getting Started"

{{< tabs Erlang Elixir >}}

{{< tab >}}
%% apps/otel_getting_started/src/otel_getting_started.erl
-module(otel_getting_started).

-export([hello/0]).

-include_lib("opentelemetry_api/include/otel_tracer.hrl").

hello() ->
    %% start an active span and run a local function
    ?with_span(<<"operation">>, #{}, fun nice_operation/1).

nice_operation(_SpanCtx) ->
    ?set_attributes([{a_key, <<"a value">>}]),
    world
{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab >}}
# lib/otel_getting_started.ex
defmodule OtelGettingStarted do
  require OpenTelemetry.Tracer, as: Tracer

  def hello do
    Tracer.with_span "operation" do
      Tracer.set_attributes([{:a_key, "a value"}])
      :world
    end
  end
end
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabs >}}

## Testing

{{< tabs Erlang Elixir >}}

{{< tab >}}

> TODO

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-module(otel_getting_started_SUITE).

-compile(export_all).

-include_lib("stdlib/include/assert.hrl").
-include_lib("common_test/include/ct.hrl").

-include_lib("opentelemetry/include/otel_span.hrl").

-define(assertReceive(SpanName),
        receive
            {span, Span=#span{name=SpanName}} ->
                Span
        after
            1000 ->
                ct:fail("Did not receive the span after 1s")
        end).

all() ->
    [greets_the_world].

init_per_suite(Config) ->
    application:load(opentelemetry),
    application:set_env(opentelemetry, processors, [{otel_simple_processor, #{}}]),
    {ok, _} = application:ensure_all_started(opentelemetry),
    Config.

end_per_suite(_Config) ->
    _ = application:stop(opentelemetry),
    _ = application:unload(opentelemetry),
    ok.

init_per_testcase(greets_the_world, Config) ->
    otel_simple_processor:set_exporter(otel_exporter_pid, self()),
    Config.

end_per_testcase(greets_the_world, _Config) ->
    otel_simple_processor:set_exporter(none),
    ok.

greets_the_world(_Config) ->
    %% SpanName = <<"operation">>,
    otel_getting_started:hello(),

    ExpectedAttributes = otel_attributes:new(#{a_key => <<"a_value">>}, 128, infinity),
    #span{attributes=ReceivedAttributes} = ?assertReceive(<<"operation">>),

    %% use an assertMatch instead of matching in the `receive'
    %% so we get a nice error message if it fails
    ?assertMatch(ReceivedAttributes, ExpectedAttributes),

    ok.
```
